Documentation restructure (#189)
NVIDIA/AIQToolkit: docs/source/tutorials/create-a-new-workflow.md

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: Copyright (c) 2025, NVIDIA CORPORATION & AFFILIATES. All rights reserved.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
-->

# Create a New Tool and Workflow

> In the [Customizing a Workflow](./customize-a-workflow.md) and [Adding Tools to a Workflow](./create-a-new-workflow.md) tutorials, we have been primarily utilizing tools that were included with the AIQ Toolkit. In this tutorial we will create a new tool that can ingest data from local files stored on disk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the [Customizing a Workflow](./customize-a-workflow.md) and [Adding Tools to a Workflow](./create-a-new-workflow.md) tutorials, we have been primarily utilizing tools that were included with the AIQ toolkit. In this tutorial, we will create a new tool that can ingest data from local files stored on disk.
```

This creates a new directory `examples/text_file_ingest` with the following layout:
```
examples/
└── text_file_ingest/
    ├── pyproject.toml
    └── src/
        └── text_file_ingest/
            ├── configs
            │   └── config.yml
            ├── __init__.py
            ├── register.py
            └── text_file_ingest_function.py
```

:::{note}
The completed code for this example can be found in the `examples/documentation_guides/workflows/text_file_ingest` directory of the AIQ Toolkit repository.
:::

By convention, tool implementations are defined within or imported into the `register.py` file. In this example, the tool implementation exists within the `text_file_ingest_function.py` file and is imported into the `register.py` file. The `pyproject.toml` file contains the package metadata and dependencies for the tool. The `text_file_ingest_function.py` that was created for us will contain a configuration object (`TextFileIngestFunctionConfig`) along with the tool function (`text_file_ingest_function`). The next two sections will walk through customizing these.

> In addition, many of these tools contain an associated workflow configuration file stored in a `config` directory, along with example data stored in a `data` directory. Since these tools are installable Python packages, and we want the workflow configuration file and data to be included in the package, they need to be located under the `examples/text_file_ingest/src/text_file_ingest` directory. For convenience symlinks can be created at the root of the project directory pointing to the actual directories. Lastly, the `README.md` file is often included in the root of the project. Resulting in a directory structure similar to the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, many of these tools contain an associated workflow configuration file stored in a `config` directory, along with example data stored in a `data` directory. Since these tools are installable Python packages, and we want the workflow configuration file and data to be included in the package, they need to be located under the `examples/text_file_ingest/src/text_file_ingest` directory. For convenience, symlinks can be created at the root of the project directory pointing to the actual directories. Lastly, the `README.md` file is often included in the root of the project. Resulting in a directory structure similar to the following:
```

```
examples/
└── text_file_ingest/
    ├── config -> src/text_file_ingest/configs
    |── data   -> src/text_file_ingest/data
    ├── pyproject.toml
    └── src/
        └── text_file_ingest/
            ├── __init__.py
            ├── configs/
            |   └── config.yml
            ├── data/
            ├── register.py
            └── text_file_ingest_function.py
```

## Customizing the Configuration Object

> Given that the purpose of this tool will be similar to that of the `webpage_query` tool, we can use it as a reference and starting point. Examining the `webpage_query` tool configuration object from `examples/simple/src/aiq_simple/register.py`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given that the purpose of this tool will be similar to that of the `webpage_query` tool, you can use it as a reference and starting point. Examining the `webpage_query` tool configuration object from `examples/simple/src/aiq_simple/register.py`:
```

```

Along with renaming the class and changing the `name`, the only other configuration attribute that needs to change is replacing `webpage_url` with a glob pattern. The resulting new tool configuration object will look like:
```python
class TextFileIngestToolConfig(FunctionBaseConfig, name="text_file_ingest"):
    ingest_glob: str
    description: str
    chunk_size: int = 1024
    embedder_name: EmbedderRef = "nvidia/nv-embedqa-e5-v5"
```

:::{note}
The `name` parameter; the value of this will need to match the `_type` value in the workflow configuration file.
For more details on AIQ Toolkit configuration objects, refer to the [Configuration Object Details](../workflows/workflow-configuration.md#configuration-object) section of the [Workflow Configuration](../workflows/workflow-configuration.md) document.
:::

## Customizing the Tool Function

The `text_file_ingest_tool` function created is already correctly associated with the `TextFileIngestToolConfig` configuration object:
```python
@register_function(config_type=TextFileIngestToolConfig)
async def text_file_ingest_tool(config: TextFileIngestToolConfig, builder: Builder):
```

> Examining the `webquery_tool` function (`examples/simple/src/aiq_simple/register.py`), we see that at the heart of the tool is the [`langchain_community.document_loaders.WebBaseLoader`](https://python.langchain.com/docs/integrations/document_loaders/web_base) class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Examining the `webquery_tool` function (`examples/simple/src/aiq_simple/register.py`), you can observe that at the heart of the tool is the [`langchain_community.document_loaders.WebBaseLoader`](https://python.langchain.com/docs/integrations/document_loaders/web_base) class.
```

    from langchain_community.document_loaders import TextLoader
    from langchain_community.vectorstores import FAISS
    from langchain_text_splitters import RecursiveCharacterTextSplitter

    embeddings: Embeddings = await builder.get_embedder(config.embedder_name, wrapper_type=LLMFrameworkEnum.LANGCHAIN)

    logger.info("Ingesting documents matching for the webpage: %s", config.ingest_glob)
    (ingest_dir, ingest_glob) = os.path.split(config.ingest_glob)
    loader = DirectoryLoader(ingest_dir, glob=ingest_glob, loader_cls=TextLoader)

    docs = [document async for document in loader.alazy_load()]

    text_splitter = RecursiveCharacterTextSplitter(chunk_size=config.chunk_size)
    documents = text_splitter.split_documents(docs)
    vector = await FAISS.afrom_documents(documents, embeddings)

    retriever = vector.as_retriever()

    retriever_tool = create_retriever_tool(
        retriever,
        "text_file_ingest",
        config.description,
    )

    async def _inner(query: str) -> str:

        return await retriever_tool.arun(query)

    yield FunctionInfo.from_fn(_inner, description=config.description)
```

## Creating the Workflow Configuration

> Starting from the `custom_config.yml` file we created in the previous section, we will replace the two `webpage_query` tools with our new `text_file_ingest` tool. As a data source we will use a collection of text files located in the `examples/docs/workflows/text_file_ingest/data` directory that describes [DOCA GPUNetIO](https://docs.nvidia.com/doca/sdk/doca+gpunetio/index.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting from the `custom_config.yml` file we created in the previous section, we will replace the two `webpage_query` tools with our new `text_file_ingest` tool. For the data source, we will use a collection of text files located in the `examples/docs/workflows/text_file_ingest/data` directory that describes [DOCA GPUNetIO](https://docs.nvidia.com/doca/sdk/doca+gpunetio/index.html).
```

> Starting from the `custom_config.yml` file we created in the previous section, we will replace the two `webpage_query` tools with our new `text_file_ingest` tool. For the data source, we will use a collection of text files located in the `examples/docs/workflows/text_file_ingest/data` directory that describes [DOCA GPUNetIO](https://docs.nvidia.com/doca/sdk/doca+gpunetio/index.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting from the `custom_config.yml` file you created in the previous section, replace the two `webpage_query` tools with the new `text_file_ingest` tool. For the data source, you can use a collection of text files located in the `examples/docs/workflows/text_file_ingest/data` directory that describes [DOCA GPUNetIO](https://docs.nvidia.com/doca/sdk/doca+gpunetio/index.html).
```

- **Dependencies**: Ensure all required libraries are listed under `[project]`.
  In the example, the tool was created inside the AIQ Toolkit repo and simply needed to declare a dependency on `aiqtoolkit[langchain]`. If, however, your tool is intended to be distributed independently then your tool will need to declare a dependency on the specific version of AIQ Toolkit that it was built against. To determine the version of AIQ Toolkit run:
  ```bash
  aiq --version
  ```

 Use the first two digits of the version number. For example if the version is `1.1.0` then the dependency would be `aiqtoolkit[langchain]~=1.1`.

  ```toml
  dependencies = [
    "aiqtoolkit[langchain]~=1.1",
    # Add any additional dependencies your workflow needs
  ]
  ```

  In this example we have been using AIQ Toolkit with LangChain, and thus we declared our dependency on `aiqtoolkit[langchain]`, that is to say AIQ Toolkit with the LangChain integration plugin. If however we wished to use LlamaIndex, we would declare our dependency on `aiqtoolkit[llama-index]`. This is described in more detail in [Framework Integrations](../quick-start/installing.md#framework-integrations).

>   we wished to use an alternate framework or other optional dependencies

Author: Good catch!

When you modify the newly created workflow and update dependencies or code, you need to reinstall the workflow package to ensure new dependencies are installed. To do so, enter the following command:

Example:
```bash
aiq workflow reinstall text_file_ingest
```

:::{note}
Alternatively, the workflow can be uninstalled with the following command:
```bash
aiq workflow delete text_file_ingest
```
:::

## Running the Workflow

:::{note}
The following commands reference the pre-built workflow located in `examples/docs/workflows/text_file_ingest`. If you are following this document and building this tool from the beginning, you will want to replace `examples/docs/workflows/text_file_ingest` with `examples/text_file_ingest`.
:::

After completed, install the tool into the environment:
```bash
uv pip install -e examples/documentation_guides/workflows/text_file_ingest
```

Run the workflow with the following command:
```bash
aiq run --config_file examples/documentation_guides/workflows/text_file_ingest/configs/config.yml \
   --input "What does DOCA GPUNetIO to remove the CPU from the critical path?"
```

> If successful, we should receive output similar to the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If successful, you should receive output similar to the following:
```
